---
layout: post
title: Some recent news from ZK VM world
---

There are several major players in this field:

- [RISC0](https://risczero.com/)
- [Lita’s Valida zk-VM](https://lita.gitbook.io/lita-documentation)
- [SP1](https://docs.succinct.xyz/)
- [Jolt](https://jolt.a16zcrypto.com/)

They all aims to provide compatibility with modern high-level programming languages (mostly - Rust) and zk-proofs of
code execution. All existing solutions also mostly leverages on ZK-STARK or ZK-SNARK technology. The high goal of such
project is to provide the cheapest in terms of resources and running time proving system for the arbitrary Rust code
execution.

The common principle is to compile Rust code into the RISC-V instructions and then generate the proof for
them. In turn, Valida team has developed custom instruction set, that aims to provide faster proofs. They also have a
great [article](https://lita.gitbook.io/lita-documentation/core-concepts/zk-vm-design-tradeoffs) about ZK VM common
architecture principles that describes what decision should ZK VM's developer teams made. They also have shared the
[benchmarks](https://lita.gitbook.io/lita-documentation/architecture/benchmarks) for the ZK VM lead projects compared to
the Valida's solution:

| Benchmark 	 | Valida to RISC0 	 | Valida to SP1    	 | Valida to Jolt  	 |
|-------------|-------------------|--------------------|-------------------|
| Fibonacci 	 | x37-56 faster   	 | x3350-420 faster 	 | x15-23 faster   	 |
| SHA256    	 | x2.5-12 fastet  	 | x12-53 faster    	 | x1.2-5.4 faster 	 |

I have also checked this benchmarks and received the following results (Intel XEON E5-2665 2.4Ghz 16 CPU, 161 RAM):

1. Fibonacci 46th element:
   - RISC0 9.102s (prove + verify)
   - Valida 1.41s (1.075s prove + 0.266s verify)
2. Rust k256 library:

  ```rust
  let private_key = Scalar::from(12345678909876554321u128);
  let amount = Scalar::from(12345u64);
  let g = k256::ProjectivePoint::GENERATOR;
  let h = g.mul(k256::Scalar::from(12345u32));
  let commitment = g.mul(private_key).add(h.mul(amount));
  ```

  - RISC0 24m18.388s (prove + 0.5s verify)
  - Valida 15m31.673s (prove + 0.379s verify)

This results shows that Valida is probably faster but only 9 times for Fibonacci and 1.6 times for k256 library. Also,
RISC0 can successfully generate proofs using only 20GB RAM while Valida requires 120GB RAM for k256 benchmark.

Note that Valida is in pretty early stage of development and some instructions are not constrained yet.

Also, RISC0 team has recently presented the [solution](https://risczero.com/blog/zeth-release) for Ethereum arbitrary block
proving that seems to be really powerful but requires a huge amount of resources (especially - GPU). I've tried to run
it only using CPU power on the machine with 72 CPU and 1500GB RAM and after 5 hours of execution I've stopped the code :)




